CHAPTER 1 Some general concepts
===============================

1.1 Types of investigation
--------------------------

This book is about the design of experiments. The word experiment
is used in a quite precise sense to mean an investigation where the
system under study is under the control of the investigator. This
means that the individuals or material investigated, the nature of
the treatments or manipulations under study and the measurement
procedures used are all settled, in their important features at least,
by the investigator.

By contrast in an observational study some of these features,
and in particular the allocation of individuals to treatment groups,
are outside the investigator’s control.

Illustration. In a randomized clinical trial patients meeting clearly
defined eligibility criteria and giving informed consent are assigned
by the investigator by an impersonal method to one of two or more
treatment arms, in the simplest case either to a new treatment, T ,
or to a standard treatment or control, C, which might be the best
current therapy or possibly a placebo treatment. The patients are
followed for a specified period and one or more measures of re-
sponse recorded.

In a comparable observational study, data on the response variables might be recorded on two groups of patients, some of whom
had received T and some C; the data might, for example, be extracted from a database set up during the normal running of a
hospital clinic. In such a study, however, it would be unknown why
each particular patient had received the treatment he or she had.

The form of data might be similar or even almost identical in
the two contexts; the distinction lies in the firmness of the interpretation that can be given to the apparent differences in response
between the two groups of patients.

Illustration. In an agricultural field trial, an experimental field is
divided into plots of a size and shape determined by the investigator, subject to technological constraints. To each plot is assigned
one of a number of fertiliser treatments, often combinations of various amounts of the basic constituents, and yield of product is
measured.

In a comparable observational study of fertiliser practice a survey
of farms or fields would give data on quantities of fertiliser used and
yield, but the issue of why each particular fertiliser combination
had been used in each case would be unclear and certainly not
under the investigator’s control.

A common feature of these and other similar studies is that
the objective is a comparison, of two medical treatments in the
first example, and of various fertiliser combinations in the second.
Many investigations in science and technology have this form. In
very broad terms, in technological experiments the treatments under comparison have a very direct interest, whereas in scientific
experiments the treatments serve to elucidate the nature of some
phenomenon of interest or to test some research hypothesis. We do
not, however, wish to emphasize distinctions between science and
technology.

We translate the objective into that of comparing the responses
among the different treatments. An experiment and an observational study may have identical objectives; the distinction between
them lies in the confidence to be put in the interpretation.

Investigations done wholly or primarily in the laboratory are
usually experimental. Studies of social science issues in the context in which they occur in the real world are usually inevitably
observational, although sometimes elements of an experimental approach may be possible. Industrial studies at pilot plant level will
typically be experimental whereas at a production level, while experimental approaches are of proved fruitfulness especially in the
process industries, practical constraints may force some deviation
from what is ideal for clarity of interpretation.

Illustration. In a survey of social attitudes a panel of individuals
might be interviewed say every year. This would be an observational study designed to study and if possible explain changes of
attitude over time. In such studies panel attrition, i.e. loss of respondents for one reason or another, is a major concern. One way
of reducing attrition may be to offer small monetary payments a
few days before the interview is due. An experiment on the effectiveness of this could take the form of randomizing individuals
between one of two treatments, a monetary payment or no monetary payment. The response would be the successful completion or
not of an interview.

1.2 Observational studies
-------------------------

While in principle the distinction between experiments and observational studies is clear cut and we wish strongly to emphasize its
importance, nevertheless in practice the distinction can sometimes
become blurred. Therefore we comment briefly on various forms of
observational study and on their closeness to experiments.
It is helpful to distinguish between a prospective longitudinal
study (cohort study), a retrospective longitudinal study, a crosssectional study, and the secondary analysis of data collected for
some other, for example, administrative purpose.

In a prospective study observations are made on individuals at
entry into the study, the individuals are followed forward in time,
and possible response variables recorded for each individual. In a
retrospective study the response is recorded at entry and an attempt is made to look backwards in time for possible explanatory
features. In a cross-sectional study each individual is observed at
just one time point. In all these studies the investigator may have
substantial control not only over which individuals are included
but also over the measuring processes used. In a secondary analysis the investigator has control only over the inclusion or exclusion
of the individuals for analysis.

In a general way the four possibilities are in decreasing order of
effectiveness, the prospective study being closest to an experiment;
they are also in decreasing order of cost.

Thus retrospective studies are subject to biases of recall but may
often yield results much more quickly than corresponding prospective studies. In principle at least, observations taken at just one
time point are likely to be less enlightening than those taken over
time. Finally secondary analysis, especially of some of the large
databases now becoming so common, may appear attractive. The
quality of such data may, however, be low and there may be major
difficulties in disentangling effects of different explanatory features,
so that often such analyses are best regarded primarily as ways of
generating ideas for more detailed study later.

In epidemiological applications, a retrospective study is often
designed as a case-control study, whereby groups of patients with
a disease or condition (cases), are compared to a hopefully similar
group of disease-free patients on their exposure to one or more risk
factors.

1.3 Some key terms
------------------

We shall return later to a more detailed description of the types
of experiment to be considered but for the moment it is enough to
consider three important elements to an experiment, namely the
experimental units, the treatments and the response. A schematic
version of an experiment is that there are a number of different
treatments under study, the investigator assigns one treatment to
each experimental unit and observes the resulting response.

Experimental units are essentially the patients, plots, animals,
raw material, etc. of the investigation. More formally they correspond to the smallest subdivision of the experimental material
such that any two different experimental units might receive dif-
ferent treatments.

Illustration. In some experiments in opthalmology it might be
sensible to apply different treatments to the left and to the right
eye of each patient. Then an experimental unit would be an eye,
that is each patient would contribute two experimental units.

The treatments are clearly defined procedures one of which is to
be applied to each experimental unit. In some cases the treatments
are an unstructured set of two or more qualitatively different procedures. In others, including many investigations in the physical
sciences, the treatments are defined by the levels of one or more
quantitative variables, such as the amounts per square metre of the
constituents nitrogen, potash and potassium, in the illustration in
Section 1.1.

The response measurement specifies the criterion in terms of
which the comparison of treatments is to be effected. In many
applications there will be several such measures.

This simple formulation can be amplified in various ways. The
same physical material can be used as an experimental unit more
than once. If the treatment structure is complicated the experimental unit may be different for different components of treatment.

The response measured may be supplemented by measurements on
other properties, called baseline variables, made before allocation
to treatment, and on intermediate variables between the baseline
variables and the ultimate response.

Illustrations. In clinical trials there will typically be available numerous baseline variables such as age at entry, gender, and specific
properties relevant to the disease, such as blood pressure, etc., all
to be measured before assignment to treatment. If the key response
is time to death, or more generally time to some critical event in the
progression of the disease, intermediate variables might be properties measured during the study which monitor or explain the
progression to the final response.

In an agricultural field trial possible baseline variables are chemical analyses of the soil in each plot and the yield on the plot in
the previous growing season, although, so far as we are aware, the
effectiveness of such variables as an aid to experimentation is limited. Possible intermediate variables are plant density, the number
of plants per square metre, and assessments of growth at various
intermediate points in the growing season. These would be included
to attempt explanation of the reasons for the effect of fertiliser on
yield of final product.

1.4 Requirements in design
--------------------------

The objective in the type of experiment studied here is the comparison of the effect of treatments on response. This will typically
be assessed by estimates and confidence limits for the magnitude
of treatment differences. Requirements on such estimates are essentially as follows. First systematic errors, or biases, are to be
avoided. Next the effect of random errors should so far as feasible be minimized. Further it should be possible to make reason-
able assessment of the magnitude of random errors, typically via
confidence limits for the comparisons of interest. The scale of the
investigation should be such as to achieve a useful but not unnecessarily high level of precision. Finally advantage should be taken
of any special structure in the treatments, for example when these are specified by combinations of factors.

The relative importance of these aspects is different in different fields of study. For example in large clinical trials to assess
relatively small differences in treatment efficacy, avoidance of systematic error is a primary issue. In agricultural field trials, and
probably more generally in studies that do not involve human subjects, avoidance of bias, while still important, is not usually the
aspect of main concern.

These objectives have to be secured subject to the practical constraints of the situation under study. The designs and considerations developed in this book have often to be adapted or modified
to meet such constraints.

1.5 Interplay between design and analysis
-----------------------------------------

There is a close connection between design and analysis in that an
objective of design is to make both analysis and interpretation as
simple and clear as possible. Equally, while some defects in design
may be corrected by more elaborate analysis, there is nearly always
some loss of security in the interpretation, i.e. in the underlying
subject-matter meaning of the outcomes.

The choice of detailed model for analysis and interpretation will
often involve subject-matter considerations that cannot readily be
discussed in a general book such as this. Partly but not entirely
for this reason we concentrate here on the analysis of continuously
distributed responses via models that are usually linear, leading to
analyses quite closely connected with the least-squares analysis of
the normal theory linear model. One intention is to show that such
default analyses follow from a single set of assumptions common to
the majority of the designs we shall consider. In this rather special
sense, the model for analysis is determined by the design employed.

Of course we do not preclude the incorporation of special subjectmatter knowledge and models where appropriate and indeed this
may be essential for interpretation.

There is a wider issue involved especially when a number of different response variables are measured and underlying interpretation is the objective rather than the direct estimation of treatment
differences. It is sensible to try to imagine the main patterns of
response that are likely to arise and to consider whether the information will have been collected to allow the interpretation of these.
This is a broader issue than that of reviewing the main scheme of
analysis to be used. Such consideration must always be desirable;
it is, however, considerably less than a prior commitment to a very
detailed approach to analysis.

Two terms quite widely used in discussions of the design of experiments are balance and orthogonality. Their definition depends a
bit on context but broadly balance refers to some strong symmetry
in the combinatorial structure of the design, whereas orthogonality refers to special simplifications of analysis and achievement of
efficiency consequent on such balance.

For example, in Chapter 3 we deal with designs for a number of
treatments in which the experimental units are arranged in blocks.
The design is balanced if each treatment occurs in each block the
same number of times, typically once. If a treatment occurs once
in some blocks and twice or not at all in others the design is considered unbalanced. On the other hand, in the context of balanced
incomplete block designs studied in Section 4.2 the word balance
refers to an extended form of symmetry.

In analyses involving a linear model, and most of our discussion
centres on these, two types of effect are orthogonal if the relevant
columns of the matrix defining the linear model are orthogonal in
the usual algebraic sense. One consequence is that the least squares
estimates of one of the effects are unchanged if the other type of
effect is omitted from the model. For orthogonality some kinds of
balance are sufficient but not necessary. In general statistical theory
there is an extended notion of orthogonality based on the Fisher
information matrix and this is relevant when maximum likelihood
analysis of more complicated models is considered.

1.6 Key steps in design
-----------------------

1.6.1 General remarks

Clearly the single most important aspect of design is a purely substantive, i.e. subject-matter, one. The issues addressed should be
interesting and fruitful. Usually this means examining one or more
well formulated questions or research hypotheses, for example a
speculation about the process underlying some phenomenon, or
the clarification and explanation of earlier findings. Some investigations may have a less focused objective. For example, the initial
phases of a study of an industrial process under production conditions may have the objective of identifying which few of a large
number of potential influences are most important. The methods
of Section 5.6 are aimed at such situations, although they are probably atypical and in most cases the more specific the research ques-
tion the better.

In principle therefore the general objectives lead to the following
more specific issues. First the experimental units must be defined
and chosen. Then the treatments must be clearly defined. The variables to be measured on each unit must be specified and finally the
size of the experiment, in particular the number of experimental
units, has to be decided.

1.6.2 Experimental units

Issues concerning experimental units are to some extent very specific to each field of application. Some points that arise fairly generally and which influence the discussion in this book include the
following.

Sometimes, especially in experiments with a technological focus,
it is useful to consider the population of ultimate interest and the
population of accessible individuals and to aim at conclusions that
will bridge the inevitable gap between these. This is linked to the
question of whether units should be chosen to be as uniform as
possible or to span a range of circumstances. Where the latter is
sensible it will be important to impose a clear structure on the
experimental units; this is connected with the issue of the choice
of baseline measurements.

Illustration. In agricultural experimentation with an immediate
objective of making recommendations to farmers it will be important to experiment in a range of soil and weather conditions; a
very precise conclusion in one set of conditions may be of limited
value. Interpretation will be much simplified if the same basic design is used at each site. There are somewhat similar considerations
in some clinical trials, pointing to the desirability of multi-centre
trials even if a trial in one centre would in principle be possible.

By contrast in experiments aimed at elucidating the nature of
certain processes or mechanisms it will usually be best to choose
units likely to show the effect in question in as striking a form as
possible and to aim for a high degree of uniformity across units.

In some contexts the same individual animal, person or material
may be used several times as an experimental unit; for example
in a psychological experiment it would be common to expose the
same subject to various conditions (treatments) in one session.

It is important in much of the following discussion and in applications to distinguish between experimental units and observa-
tions. The key notion is that different experimental units must in
principle be capable of receiving different treatments.

Illustration. In an industrial experiment on a batch process each
separate batch of material might form an experimental unit to be
processed in a uniform way, separate batches being processed possibly differently. On the product of each batch many samples may
be taken to measure, say purity of the product. The number of
observations of purity would then be many times the number of
experimental units. Variation between repeat observations within
a batch measures sampling variability and internal variability of
the process. Precision of the comparison of treatments is, however, largely determined by, and must be estimated from, variation
between batches receiving the same treatment. In our theoretical
treatment that follows the number of batches is thus the relevant
total “sample” size.

1.6.3 Treatments
----------------

The simplest form of experiment compares a new treatment or
manipulation, T , with a control, C. Even here care is needed in
applications. In principle T has to be specified with considerable
precision, including many details of its mode of implementation.
The choice of control, C, may also be critical. In some contexts
several different control treatments may be desirable. Ideally the
control should be such as to isolate precisely that aspect of T which
it is the objective to examine.

Illustration. In a clinical trial to assess a new drug, the choice of
control may depend heavily on the context. Possible choices of control might be no treatment, a placebo treatment, i.e. a substance
superficially indistinguishable from T but known to be pharmacologically inactive, or the best currently available therapy. The
choice between placebo and best available treatment may in some
clinical trials involve difficult ethical decisions.

In more complex situations there may be a collection of qualitatively different treatments T1,...,Tv. More commonly the treatments may have factorial structure, i.e. be formed from combinations of levels of subtreatments, called factors. We defer detailed
study of the different kinds of factor and the design of factorial
experiments until Chapter 5, noting that sensible use of the principle of examining several factors together in one study is one of
the most powerful ideas in this subject.


1.6.4 Measurements
------------------

The choice of appropriate variables for measurement is a key aspect
of design in the broad sense. The nature of measurement processes
and their associated potentiality for error, and the different kinds
of variable that can be measured and their purposes are central issues. Nevertheless these issues fall outside the scope of the present
book and we merely note three broad types of variable, namely
baseline variables describing the experimental units before application of treatments, intermediate variables and response variables,
in a medical context often called end-points.

Intermediate variables may serve different roles. Usually the more
important is to provide some provisional explanation of the process
that leads from treatment to response. Other roles are to check on
the absence of untoward interventions and, sometimes, to serve as
surrogate response variables when the primary response takes a
long time to obtain.

Sometimes the response on an experimental unit is in effect a
time trace, for example of the concentrations of one or more substances as transient functions of time after some intervention. For
our purposes we suppose such responses replaced by one or more
summary measures, such as the peak response or the area under
the response-time curve.

Clear decisions about the variables to be measured, especially
the response variables, are crucial.

1.6.5 Size of experiment
------------------------

Some consideration virtually always has to be given to the number of experimental units to be used and, where subsampling of
units is employed, to the number of repeat observations per unit.
A balance has to be struck between the marginal cost per experimental unit and the increase in precision achieved per additional
unit. Except in rare instances where these costs can both be quantified, a decision on the size of experiment is bound be largely a
matter of judgement and some of the more formal approaches to
determining the size of the experiment have spurious precision. It
is, however, very desirable to make an advance approximate calculation of the precision likely to be achieved. This gives some
protection against wasting resources on unnecessary precision or,
more commonly, against undertaking investigations which will be
of such low precision that useful conclusions are very unlikely. The
same calculations are advisable when, as is quite common in some
fields, the maximum size of the experiment is set by constraints
outside the control of the investigator. The issue is then most commonly to decide whether the resources are sufficient to yield enough
precision to justify proceeding at all.

1.7 A simplified model
----------------------

The formulation of experimental design that will largely be used
in this book is as follows. There are given n experimental units,
U1,...,Un and v treatments, T1,...,Tv; one treatment is applied
to each unit as specified by the investigator, and one response
Y measured on each unit. The objective is to specify procedures
for allocating treatments to units and for the estimation of the
differences between treatments in their effect on response.

This is a very limited version of the broader view of design
sketched above. The justification for it is that many of the valuable
specific designs are accommodated in this framework, whereas the
wider considerations sketched above are often so subject-specific
that it is difficult to give a general theoretical discussion.

It is, however, very important to recall throughout that the path
between the choice of a unit and the measurement of final response
may be a long one in time and in other respects and that random
and systematic error may arise at many points. Controlling for
random error and aiming to eliminate systematic error is thus not
a single step matter as might appear in our idealized model.

1.8 A broader view
------------------

The discussion above and in the remainder of the book concentrates
on the integrity of individual experiments. Yet investigations are
rarely if ever conducted in isolation; one investigation almost inevitably suggests further issues for study and there is commonly
the need to establish links with work related to the current problems, even if only rather distantly. These are important matters but
again are difficult to incorporate into formal theoretical discussion.

If a given collection of investigations estimate formally the same
contrasts, the statistical techniques for examining mutual consistency of the different estimates and, subject to such consistency,
of combining the information are straightforward. Difficulties come
more from the choice of investigations for inclusion, issues of genuine comparability and of the resolution of apparent inconsistencies.

While we take the usual objective of the investigation to be the
comparison of responses from different treatments, sometimes there
is a more specific objective which has an impact on the design to
be employed.

Illustrations. In some kinds of investigation in the chemical process industries, the treatments correspond to differing concentrations of various reactants and to variables such as pressure, temperature, etc. For some purposes it may be fruitful to regard the objective as the determination of conditions that will optimize some
criterion such as yield of product or yield of product per unit cost.
Such an explicitly formulated purpose, if adopted as the sole objective, will change the approach to design.

In selection programmes for, say, varieties of wheat, the investigation may start with a very large number of varieties, possibly
several hundred, for comparison. A certain fraction of these are chosen for further study and in a third phase a small number of varieties are subject to intensive study. The initial stage has inevitably
very low precision for individual comparisons and analysis of the
design strategy to be followed best concentrates on such issues as
the proportion of varieties to be chosen at each phase, the relative
effort to be devoted to each phase and in general on the properties
of the whole process and the properties of the varieties ultimately
selected rather than on the estimation of individual differences.

In the pharmaceutical industry clinical trials are commonly defined as Phase I, II or III, each of which has quite well-defined
objectives. Phase I trials aim to establish relevant dose levels and
toxicities, Phase II trials focus on a narrowly selected group of patients expected to show the most dramatic response, and Phase III
trials are a full investigation of the treatment effects on patients
broadly representative of the clinical population.

In investigations with some technological relevance, even if there
is not an immediate focus on a decision to be made, questions will
arise as to the practical implications of the conclusions. Is a difference established big enough to be of public health relevance in an
epidemiological context, of relevance to farmers in an agricultural
context or of engineering relevance in an industrial context? Do the
conditions of the investigation justify extrapolation to the working context? To some extent such questions can be anticipated by
appropriate design.

In both scientific and technological studies estimation of effects
is likely to lead on to the further crucial question: what is the underlying process explaining what has been observed? Sometimes
this is expressed via a search for causality. So far as possible these questions should be anticipated in design, 
especially in the definition of treatments and observations, but it is relatively rare for such
explanations to be other than tentative and indeed they typically
raise fresh issues for investigation.

It is sometimes argued that quite firm conclusions about causality are justified from experiments in which treatment allocation is
made by objective randomization but not otherwise, it being particularly hazardous to draw causal conclusions from observational
studies.

These issues are somewhat outside the scope of the present book
but will be touched on in Section 2.5 after the discussion of the
role of randomization. In the meantime some of the potential implications for design can be seen from the following Illustration.

Illustration. In an agricultural field trial a number of treatments
are randomly assigned to plots, the response variable being the
yield of product. One treatment, S, say, produces a spectacular
growth of product, much higher than that from other treatments.
The growth attracts birds from many kilometres around, the birds
eat most of the product and as a result the final yield for S is very
low. Has S caused a depression in yield?

The point of this illustration, which can be paralleled from other
areas of application, is that the yield on the plots receiving S is indeed lower than the yield would have been on those plots had they
been allocated to other treatments. In that sense, which meets one
of the standard definitions of causality, allocation to S has thus
caused a lowered yield. Yet in terms of understanding, and indeed
practical application, that conclusion on its own is quite misleading. To understand the process leading to the final responses it is
essential to observe and take account of the unanticipated intervention, the birds, which was supplementary to and dependent on the
primary treatments. Preferably also intermediate variables should
be recorded, for example, number of plants per square metre and
measures of growth at various time points in the growing cycle.
These will enable at least a tentative account to be developed of
the process leading to the treatment differences in final yield which
are the ultimate objective of study. In this way not only are treatment differences estimated but some partial understanding is built
of the interpretation of such differences. This is a potentially causal
explanation at a deeper level.

Such considerations may arise especially in situations in which
a fairly long process intervenes between treatment allocation and
the measurement of response.

These issues are quite pressing in some kinds of clinical trial,
especially those in which patients are to be followed for an appreciable time. In the simplest case of randomization between two
treatments, T and C, there is the possibility that some patients,
called noncompliers, do not follow the regime to which they have
been allocated. Even those who do comply may take supplementary
medication and the tendency to do this may well be different in
the two treatment groups. One approach to analysis, the so-called
intention-to-treat principle, can be summarized in the slogan “ever
randomized always analysed”: one simply compares outcomes in
the two treatment arms regardless of compliance or noncompliance. The argument, parallel to the argument in the agricultural
example, is that if, say, patients receiving T do well, even if few of
them comply with the treatment regimen, then the consequences of
allocation to T are indeed beneficial, even if not necessarily because
of the direct consequences of the treatment regimen.

Unless noncompliance is severe, the intention-to-treat analysis
will be one important analysis but a further analysis taking account
of any appreciable noncompliance seems very desirable. Such an
analysis will, however, have some of the features of an observational
study and the relatively clearcut conclusions of the analysis of a
fully compliant study will be lost to some extent at least.

1.9 Bibliographic notes
-----------------------

While many of the ideas of experimental design have a long history,
the first major systematic discussion was by R. A. Fisher (1926)
in the context of agricultural field trials, subsequently developed
into his magisterial book (Fisher, 1935 and subsequent editions).
Yates in a series of major papers developed the subject much further; see especially Yates (1935, 1936, 1937). Applications were
initially largely in agriculture and the biological sciences and then
subsequently in industry. The paper by Box and Wilson (1951) was
particularly influential in an industrial context. Recent industrial
applications have been particularly associated with the name of
the Japanese engineer, G. Taguchi. General books on scientific research that include some discussion of experimental design include
Wilson (1952) and Beveridge (1952).

Of books on the subject, Cox (1958) emphasizes general prin-
ciples in a qualitative discussion, Box, Hunter and Hunter (1978)
emphasize industrial experiments and Hinkelman and Kempthorne
(1994), a development of Kempthorne (1952), is closer to the originating agricultural applications. Piantadosi (1997) gives a thorough account of the design and analysis of clinical trials.
Vajda (1967a, 1967b) and Street and Street (1987) emphasize
the combinatorial problems of design construction. Many general
books on statistical methods have some discussion of design but
tend to put their main emphasis on analysis; see especially Montgomery (1997). For very careful and systematic expositions with
some emphasis respectively on industrial and biometric applications, see Dean and Voss (1999) and Clarke and Kempson (1997).

An annotated bibliography of papers up to the late 1960’s is
given by Herzberg and Cox (1969).

The notion of causality has a very long history although traditionally from a nonprobabilistic viewpoint. For accounts with
a statistical focus, see Rubin (1974), Holland (1986), Cox (1992)
and Cox and Wermuth (1996; section 8.7). Rather different views
of causality are given by Dawid (2000), Lauritzen (2000) and Pearl
(2000). For a discussion of compliance in clinical trials, see the
papers edited by Goetghebeur and van Houwelingen (1998).
New mathematical developments in the design of experiments
may be found in the main theoretical journals. More applied papers
may also contain ideas of broad interest. For work with a primarily
industrial focus, see Technometrics, for general biometric material,
see Biometrics, for agricultural issues see the Journal of Agricultural Science and for specialized discussion connected with clinical
trials see Controlled Clinical Trials, Biostatistics and Statistics in
Medicine. Applied Statistics contains papers with a wide range of
applications.

1.10 Further results and exercises
----------------------------------

1. A study of the association between car telephone usage and
accidents was reported by Redelmeier and Tibshirani (1997a)
and a further careful account discussed in detail the study design (Redelmeier and Tibshirani, 1997b). A randomized trial
was infeasible on ethical grounds, and the investigators decided
to conduct a case-control study. The cases were those individuals who had been in an automobile collision involving property
damage (but not personal injury), who owned car phones, and
who consented to having their car phone usage records reviewed.

(a) What considerations would be involved in finding a suitable
control for each case?

(b) The investigators decided to use each case as his own control, in a specialized version of a case-control 
study called a casecrossover study. A “case driving period” was defined to be
the ten minutes immediately preceding the collision. What
considerations would be involved in determining the control
period?

(c) An earlier study compared the accident rates of a group of
drivers who owned cellular telephones to a group of drivers
who did not, and found lower accident rates in the first group.
What potential biases could affect this comparison?

2. A prospective case-crossover experiment to investigate the effect
of alcohol on blood œstradiol levels was reported by Ginsberg et
al. (1996). Two groups of twelve healthy postmenopausal women
were investigated. One group was regularly taking œstrogen replacement therapy and the second was not. On the first day half
the women in each group drank an alcoholic cocktail, and the
remaining women had a similar juice drink without alcohol. On
the second day the women who first had alcohol were given the
plain juice drink and vice versa. In this manner it was intended
that each woman serve as her own control.

(a) What precautions might well have been advisable in such a
context to avoid bias?

(b) What features of an observational study does this study have?

(c) What features of an experiment does this study have?

3. Find out details of one or more medical studies the conclusions
from which have been reported in the press recently. Were they
experiments or observational studies? Is the design (or analysis)
open to serious criticism?

© 2000 by Chapman & Hall/CRC

4. In an experiment to compare a number of alternative ways of
treating back pain, pain levels are to be assessed before and after
a period of intensive treatment. Think of a number of ways in
which pain levels might be measured and discuss their relative
merits. What measurements other than pain levels might be
advisable?

5. As part of a study of the accuracy and precision of laboratory
chemical assays, laboratories are provided with a number of
nominally identical specimens for analysis. They are asked to
divide each specimen into two parts and to report the separate analyses. Would this provide an adequate measure of reproducibility? If not recommend a better procedure.

6. Some years ago there was intense interest in the possibility
that cloud-seeding by aircraft depositing silver iodide crystals
on suitable cloud would induce rain. Discuss some of the issues
likely to arise in studying the effect of cloud-seeding.

7. Preece et al. (1999) simulated the effect of mobile phone signals
on cognitive function as follows. Subjects wore a headset and
were subject to (i) no signal, (ii) a 915 MHz sine wave analogue
signal, (iii) a 915 MHz sine wave modulated by a 217 Hz square
wave. There were 18 subjects, and each of the six possible orders
of the three conditions were used three times. After two practice
sessions the three experimental conditions were used for each
subject with 48 hours between tests. During each session a vari-
ety of computerized tests of mental efficiency were administered.
The main result was that a particular reaction time was shorter
under the condition (iii) than under (i) and (ii) but that for
14 other types of measurement there were no clear differences.
Discuss the appropriateness of the control treatments and the
extent to which stability of treatment differences across sessions
might be examined.

8. Consider the circumstances under which the use of two different
control groups might be valuable. For discussion of this for observational studies, where the idea is more commonly used, see
Rosenbaum (1987).

