C01
====

Part I Python and Statistics

The first part of the book presents an introduction to statistics based on Python. It is
impossible to cover the whole language in 30 or 40 pages, so if you are a beginner,
please see one of the excellent Python introductions available in the internet for
details. Links are given below. This part is a kick-start for Python; it shows how
to install Python under Windows, Linux, or MacOS, and goes step-by-step through
documented programming examples. Tips are included to help avoid some of the
problems frequently encountered while learning Python.

La primera parte del libro presenta una introducción a la estadística basada en Python. Es imposible abarcar todo el 
lenguaje en 30 o 40 páginas, así que si eres principiante, consulta alguna de las excelentes introducciones a Python 
disponibles en internet para obtener más información. Los enlaces se encuentran a continuación. Esta parte es una 
introducción a Python; muestra cómo instalar Python en Windows, Linux o macOS y guía paso a paso a través de ejemplos de 
programación documentados. Se incluyen consejos para ayudarte a evitar algunos de los problemas frecuentes al aprender 
Python.

Because most of the data for statistical analysis are commonly obtained from text
files, Excel files, or data preprocessed by Matlab, the second chapter presents simple
ways to import these types of data into Python.

Dado que la mayoría de los datos para el análisis estadístico se obtienen comúnmente de archivos de texto, archivos de 
Excel o datos preprocesados ​​por Matlab, el segundo capítulo presenta formas simples de importar este tipo de datos a 
Python.

The last chapter of this part illustrates various ways of visualizing data in Python.
Since the flexibility of Python for interactive data analysis has led to a certain
complexity that can frustrate new Python programmers, the code samples presented
in Chap. 3 for various types of interactive plots should help future Pythonistas avoid
these problems.

El último capítulo de esta parte ilustra diversas maneras de visualizar datos en Python. Dado que la flexibilidad de Python 
para el análisis interactivo de datos ha generado cierta complejidad que puede frustrar a los nuevos programadores, los 
ejemplos de código presentados en el capítulo 3 para diversos tipos de gráficos interactivos deberían ayudar a los futuros 
Pythonistas a evitar estos problemas.

Chapter 1 Why Statistics?
--------------------------

Statistics is the explanation of variance in the light of what remains unexplained.

La estadística es la explicación de la varianza a la luz de lo que queda sin explicar.


1.1 Why Statistics?
-------------------

Every day we are confronted with situations with uncertain outcomes, and must
make decisions based on incomplete data: “Should I run for the bus? Which stock
should I buy? Which man should I marry? Should I take this medication? Should
I have my children vaccinated?” Some of these questions are beyond the realm
of statistics (“Which person should I marry?”), because they involve too many
unknown variables. But in many situations, statistics can help extract maximum
knowledge from information given, and clearly spell out what we know and what we
don’t know. For example, it can turn a vague statement like “This medication may
cause nausea,” or “You could die if you don’t take this medication” into a specific
statement like “Three patients in one thousand experience nausea when taking this
medication,” or “If you don’t take this medication, there is a 95 % chance that you
will die.”

Diariamente nos enfrentamos a situaciones con resultados inciertos y debemos tomar decisiones basadas en datos incompletos: 
"¿Debería apresurarme? ¿Qué acciones debería comprar? ¿Con qué hombre debería casarme? ¿Debería tomar este medicamento? 
¿Debería vacunar a mis hijos?". Algunas de estas preguntas escapan al ámbito estadístico ("¿Con qué persona debería 
casarme?"), porque implican demasiadas variables desconocidas. Pero en muchas situaciones, la estadística puede ayudar a 
extraer el máximo conocimiento de la información proporcionada y a explicar claramente lo que sabemos y lo que no sabemos. 
Por ejemplo, puede convertir una afirmación vaga como "Este medicamento puede causar náuseas" o "Podría morir si no toma 
este medicamento" en una afirmación específica como "Tres pacientes de cada mil experimentan náuseas al tomar este 
medicamento" o "Si no toma este medicamento, hay un 95 % de probabilidades de morir".

 Without statistics, the 
interpretation 
of data can quickly become massively flawed. Take, for example, the estimated number of German tanks produced during
World War II, also known as the “German Tank Problem.” The estimate of the
number of German tanks produced per month from standard intelligence data was
1,550; however, the statistical estimate based on the number of tanks observed
was 327, which was very close to the actual production number of 342 (http://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/German_tank_problem).

Sin estadísticas, la interpretación de los datos puede rápidamente volverse errónea. Tomemos, por ejemplo, la cantidad 
estimada de tanques alemanes producidos durante la Segunda Guerra Mundial, también conocida como el "Problema de los 
Tanques Alemanes". La estimación del número de tanques alemanes producidos al mes, basada en datos de inteligencia 
estándar, era de 1550; sin embargo, la estimación estadística basada en el número de tanques observados era de 327, muy 
cercana a la producción real de 342 (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/German_tank_problem).

 Similarly, using the wrong tests 
can also lead to erroneous results.

De la misma manera, utilizar pruebas incorrectas también puede conducir a resultados erróneos.


In general, statistics will help to

• Clarify the question.
• Identify the variable and the measure of that variable that will answer that question.
• Determine the required sample size.
• Describe variation.
• Make quantitative statements about estimated parameters.
• Make predictions based on your data.

Reading the Book. Statistics was originally invented—like so many other things—
by the famous mathematician C.F. Gauss, who said about his own work, “Ich habe
fleissig sein müssen; wer es gleichfalls ist, wird eben so weit kommen.” (“I had to
work hard; if you work hard as well, you, too, will be successful.”). Just as reading a
book about playing the piano won’t turn you into a great pianist, simply reading this
book will not teach you statistical data analysis. If you don’t have your own data
to analyze, you need to do the exercises included. Should you become frustrated or
stuck, you can always check the sample Solutions provided at the end of the book.

Leyendo el libro. La estadística fue inventada originalmente, como tantas otras cosas, por el famoso matemático C.F. Gauss, 
quien dijo sobre su propio trabajo: «Ich habe fleissig sein müssen; wer es gleichfalls ist, wird eben so weit kommen» 
(«Tuve que trabajar duro; si tú también trabajas duro, tú también tendrás éxito»). Así como leer un libro sobre tocar el 
piano no te convertirá en un gran pianista, simplemente leer este libro no te enseñará análisis estadístico de datos. Si no 
tienes tus propios datos para analizar, necesitas hacer los ejercicios incluidos. Si te frustras o te atascas, siempre 
puedes consultar las soluciones de ejemplo que se proporcionan al final del libro.


Exercises. Solutions to the exercises provided can be found at the end of the book.
In my experience, very few people work through large numbers of examples on their
own, so I have not included additional exercises in this book.
If the information here is not sufficient, additional material can be found in other
statistical textbooks and on the web:

Ejercicios. Las soluciones de los ejercicios propuestos se encuentran al final del libro. En mi experiencia, muy pocas 
personas resuelven grandes cantidades de ejemplos por sí solas, por lo que no he incluido ejercicios adicionales en este 
libro. Si la información aquí presentada no es suficiente, se puede encontrar material adicional en otros libros de texto 
de estadística y en internet:


Books. There are a number of good books on statistics. My favorite is Altman
(1999): it does not dwell on computers and modeling, but gives an extremely useful
introduction to the field, especially for life sciences and medical applications. Many
formulations and examples in this manuscript have been taken from that book.
A more modern book, which is more voluminous and, in my opinion, a bit harder to
read, is Riffenburgh (2012). Kaplan (2009) provides a simple introduction to modern
regression modeling. If you know your basic statistics, a very good introduction
to Generalized Linear Models can be found in Dobson and Barnett (2008), which
provides a sound, advanced treatment of statistical modeling.

Libros. Hay varios libros buenos sobre estadística. Mi favorito es Altman (1999): no se centra en computadoras ni modelado, 
sino que ofrece una introducción extremadamente útil al campo, especialmente para las ciencias de la vida y las 
aplicaciones médicas. Muchas formulaciones y ejemplos de este manuscrito se han tomado de ese libro. Un libro más moderno, 
más voluminoso y, en mi opinión, un poco más difícil de leer, es Riffenburgh (2012). Kaplan (2009) ofrece una introducción 
sencilla al modelado de regresión moderno. Si tiene conocimientos básicos de estadística, puede encontrar una excelente 
introducción a los modelos lineales generalizados en Dobson y Barnett (2008), que ofrece un tratamiento sólido y avanzado 
del modelado estadístico.

WWW In the web, you will find very extensive information on statistics in
English at

• http://www.statsref.com/
• http://www.vassarstats.net/
• http://www.biostathandbook.com/
• http://onlinestatbook.com/2/index.html
• http://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/handbook/index.htm

A good German web page on statistics and regulatory issues is http://www.reiter1.com/.

I hope to convince you that Python provides clear and flexible tools for most of
the statistical problems that you will encounter, and that you will enjoy using it.

1.2 Conventions
---------------

The following conventions will be used.

• Text that is to be typed in on the computer is written in Courier font, e.g., plot(x,y).
• Optional text in command-line entries is expressed with <...>, e.g., <InstallationDir>.
• Names referring to computer programs and applications are written in italics, e.g., Jupyter.
• Italics will also be used when introducing new terms or expressions for the first time.
• Really important points that should definitely be remembered are indicated as follows:

This will be important!

1.3 Accompanying Material
-------------------------

All the examples and solutions shown in this book are available online. This
includes code samples and example programs, Jupyter Notebooks with additional
or extended information, as well as the data and Python code used to generate many
of the figures. They can be downloaded from GitHub
https://github.com/thomas-haslwanter/statsintro-python-2e
which is organized in folders:

Todos los ejemplos y soluciones que se muestran en este libro están disponibles en línea. Esto incluye ejemplos de código y 
programas de ejemplo, cuadernos Jupyter con información adicional o ampliada, así como los datos y el código Python 
utilizados para generar muchas de las figuras. Se pueden descargar desde GitHub 
(https://github.com/thomas-haslwanter/statsintro-python-2e), organizados en carpetas:

data: Raw data required for running the programs.

resources: Images used by this repository.

ipynbs: Jupyter Notebooks with examples, and with additional or
extended information that goes beyond the content pre-
sented in the book.

src/exercise_solutions: Solutions to the exercises that are presented at the end of most chapters.

src/listings: Programs that are explicitly listed in this book.

src/figures: Code used to generate the Python figures in the text.
Unless noted otherwise, the source code for
Python figures is available in the source file
F<chapter-#>_<figure-#>_xxx.py. For example, Fig. 8.4 can be generated with the Python code in
F8_4_anovaOneway.py

src/code_quantlets: Additional code samples.

In this book, references to the src/code_quantlets-directory in this repository will be abbreviated with <ISP2e>. Make sure also to look at the file
Errata.pdf in the top folder of that archive, which will be kept up to date with
corrections to any mistakes that are discovered after publication of the book.

Packages on GitHub are called repositories, and can easily be copied to
your computer: when git is installed on your computer, simply type
git clone <RepositoryName> (here, the repository name of
statsintro-python-2e given above) in a command terminal, and the whole
repository—code as well as data—will be “cloned” to your system. Alternatively,
you can download a ZIP-archive from there to your local system.

Los paquetes en GitHub se llaman repositorios y se pueden copiar fácilmente a tu ordenador: una vez instalado Git, 
simplemente escribe git clone <NombreDeRepositorio> (aquí, el nombre del repositorio statsintro-python-2e mencionado 
anteriormente) en una terminal de comandos y todo el repositorio, tanto el código como los datos, se clonará en tu sistema. 
También puedes descargar un archivo ZIP desde allí a tu sistema local.



