damaso
======


SE3-P011 
--------
-
QUANTUM CHEMICAL PROFILING OF THE A AND F HELICES OF THE IL-10 PROTEIN USING DFT: KEY RESIDUES FOR 
THERAPEUTIC TARGETING

PERFIL QUÍMICO CUÁNTICO DE LAS HÉLICES A Y F DE LA PROTEÍNA IL-10 UTILIZANDO DFT: RESIDUOS CLAVE PARA LA OBJETIVO 
TERAPÉUTICO

Juan Carlos Santiago-Jiménez1 , Helena Solleiro-Villavicencio2 , Gabriel Ramírez Damaso1 , Fray de Landa Castillo 
Alvarado1  1 Escuela Superior de Física y Matemáticas del Instituto Politécnico Nacional, ESFM-IPN, Mexico. 2 
Universidad Autónoma de la Ciudad de México, CCyT-CIENCIAS GENÓMICAS, Mexico.

Research reports that interleukin-10 (IL-10) regulates the immune system by binding to the interleukin-10 receptor 
(IL-10R) present on the surface of immune cells, triggering internal signalling to control inflammation, prevent 
autoimmunity, and maintain immune homeostasis. However, inhibition, overexpression, silencing, or low activity of 
IL-10 leads to various autoimmune diseases and cancer. It is necessary to conduct quantumlevel research to 
identify the atoms and amino acids (AA) that influence IL-10/IL-10R binding. We constructed a quantum model of the 
mature human IL-10 protein in its A and F helices using molecular modeling and simulation techniques based on 
density functional theory (DFT). We identified the zones of maximum and minimum reactivity, quantum mechanical 
characteristics, and its HOMO-LUMO frontier molecular orbitals, Fukui indices, and Mulliken populations. We have 
identified and reported for the first time the atoms and AAs that determine the IL-10/L-10R interaction and the 
modifications to them that can inhibit IL-10´s biological function. Our results are highly useful for the study of 
autoimmune diseases and cancer, as well as for the development of more effective treatments and targeted drugs.

Las investigaciones indican que la interleucina-10 (IL-10) regula el sistema inmunitario al unirse al receptor de 
interleucina-10 (IL-10R) presente en la superficie de las células inmunitarias, lo que desencadena una 
señalización interna para controlar la inflamación, prevenir la autoinmunidad y mantener la homeostasis 
inmunitaria. Sin embargo, la inhibición, la sobreexpresión, el silenciamiento o la baja actividad de la IL-10 
conducen a diversas enfermedades autoinmunitarias y al cáncer. Es necesario realizar investigaciones a nivel 
cuántico para identificar los átomos y aminoácidos (AA) que influyen en la unión de IL-10/IL-10R. Construimos un 
modelo cuántico de la proteína IL-10 humana madura en sus hélices A y F utilizando técnicas de modelado y 
simulación molecular basadas en la teoría del funcional de la densidad (DFT). Identificamos las zonas de máxima y 
mínima reactividad, las características mecánico-cuánticas y sus orbitales moleculares de frontera HOMO-LUMO, los 
índices de Fukui y las poblaciones de Mulliken. Hemos identificado y reportado por primera vez los átomos y AA que 
determinan la interacción IL-10/L-10R y las modificaciones en ellos que pueden inhibir la función biológica de 
IL-10. Nuestros resultados son de gran utilidad para el estudio de enfermedades autoinmunes y el cáncer, así como 
para el desarrollo de tratamientos más efectivos y fármacos dirigidos.

 Keywords: DFT-THEORY, IL-10/L-10R, 
AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES/CANCER

SE3-P012 
--------

CHARACTERIZATION OF LENACAPAVIR BY DFT THEORY: EVALUATION OF ELECTRONIC PROPERTIES AND IMPROVEMENT OF 
ANTIVIRAL POTENTIAL

Juan Carlos Santiago-Jiménez1 , Gabriel Ramírez-Damaso1 , Francisco V Caballero-Domínguez2 , Fray de Landa 
Castillo Alvarado1  1 Escuela Superior de Física y Matemáticas del Instituto Politécnico Nacional, ESFM-IPN, 
Mexico. 2 FES Zaragoza, INGENIERIA QUÍMICA-UNAM, Mexico.

Lenacapavir is the first human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) capsid inhibitor approved by the US Food and 
Drug Administration and the European Medicines Agency for the treatment of multidrug-resistant infections. Its 
unique mechanism and semiannual dosing make it a promising therapy. However, the high
mutation rate of viruses represents a constant risk of the emergence of capsid variants and mutations. It is 
important to investigate the molecular regions determining its antiviral activity using quantum physics. We 
constructed a quantum model of Lenacapavir using density functional theory (DFT), identified the zones of maximum 
and minimum reactivity, its quantum mechanical characteristics, and its HOMO-LUMO frontier molecular orbitals, 
Fukui indices, and Mulliken populations. We identified and reported for the first time the regions of maximum and 
minimum molecular reactivity that confer its biological function as a capsid inhibitor. Our quantum model and 
results are useful for the study of monitoring emerging resistances, studying their role in functional cure 
strategies and expanding their use to special populations (pregnancy, pediatrics).

Keywords: HIV-1/CAPSID INHIBITOR, DFT THEORY, ANTIVIRAL RESISTANCE

